Disponible en ligne sur www.sciencedirect.com
IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254
Original article
Visualization of cardiac health using vector cardiogram
Visualisation de la sant´e cardiaque par le vecteur de cardiogramme
J. Chee, R. Acharya U∗, K. Er, W. Tan, C. Kuang Chua
School of Engineering, Ngee Ann Polytechnic, 535 Clementi Road, Singapore 599 489, Singapore
Received 15 May 2007; accepted 4 October 2007
Available online 26 November 2007
Abstract
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is an electrical recording of the heart and is used in the investigation of heart disease. It displays an apparent period-
icity (of about 60–100 bpm in a healthy adult), but is not exactly periodic. The symptoms of disease may show up only during certain periods of the
day, and that too may occur at random in the time scale. Visual media is a most effective tool for communication, especially when the data has subtle
variations. A novel visualization technique is presented to display each ECG beat. The features like PR interval, QRS width, ST interval, are extracted
from the magnitude and phase plot of different lead combinations. These features are displayed on a Cartesian quadrant as different curves, with a
menu driven display strategy to visualize the ECG for a chosen interval. The scheme employed can be used to identify different types of abnormalities.
© 2007 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
R´esum´e
Un ´electrocardiogramme est en quelque sorte « un enregistrement ´electrique » du cœur ; il est utilis´e pour la d´etection des maladies cardiaques.
L’´electrocardiogramme (ECG) montre une p ´eriodicit´e apparente mais il n’est pas exactement p ´eriodique. Les sympt ˆomes de la maladie peuvent
apparaˆıtre durant certaines p´eriodes de la journ´ee mais ils peuvent aussi se manifester de fac¸on al´eatoire dans le temps. Le moyen visuel est l’outil
de communication le plus efﬁcace particuli`erement dans le cas de donn´ees pour lesquelles les variations sont subtiles. Une nouvelle visualisation
technique montrant chaque battement de l’ECG est pr´esent´ee. Les param`etres caract´eristiques tels que l’intervalle PR, la largeur QRS, l’intervalle
ST sont extraits `a partir de l’amplitude et de la largeur des phases des courbes. Ils sont report ´es sur un cadran cart ´esien et apparaissent comme
diff´erentes courbes, avec un menu qui permet d’offrir une strat´egie de visualisation de l’ECG pour un intervalle donn ´e. Le sch´ema employ´e peut
ˆetre utilis´e pour mettre en ´evidence diff´erents types d’anormalit´e.
© 2007 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Electrocardiogram (ECG); Heart rate; Visualization; PQRST wave; Arrhythmia
Mots cl´es : ´Electrocardiogramme (ECG) ; Rythme cardiaque ; Onde PQRST ; Arythmie
1. Introduction
The last two decades have witnessed the recognition of a
signiﬁcant relationship between the autonomic nervous sys-
tem and cardiovascular mortality, including sudden cardiac
death [1–4]. Experimental evidence for an association between
propensity for lethal arrhythmias and signs of either increased
sympathetic or reduced vagal activity has spurred efforts
for the development of quantitative markers of autonomic
activity.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: aru@np.edu.sg (R.A. U).
Electrocardiography is the recording of the electrical activity
of the heart. Monitored by placing sensors at deﬁned positions
on chest and limb extremities of the subject, electrocardio-
gram (ECG) is a record of the origin and propagation of the
electrical action potential through cardiac muscle. This signal
is representative of cardiac physiology, useful in diagnosing
cardiac disorders. The state of cardiac health is generally
reﬂected in the shape of ECG waveform and heart rate. It may
contain important pointers to the nature of diseases afﬂicting
the heart. However, bio-signals being non-stationary signals,
this reﬂection may occur at random in the time scale.
The ECG signal is usually recorded in magnetic tapes
(holter recording), a digitized version of which can be stored
1959-0318/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.rbmret.2007.10.002

246 J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254
in computers. However, the above details are not clearly
perceptible through casual observation of the raw signal on
the screen. Therefore, it is convenient to analyze and classify
the signal using a computer, and display the results for clinical
observation. Cardiac disorders are currently diagnosed from
electrical heart signal recordings (electrocardiograms or ECG)
by identifying subtle variations in the twelve channels (leads)
of ECG waveforms. To the trained eye the subtle variations in
different channels can be correlated (in the mind) to indicate
different cardiac disorders.
The regular normal heartbeat is generated by electrical
impulses arising from the sinus node located in the right
upper chamber (atrium). The heart muscle must be activated
electrically before it can initiate its mechanical function of
pumping the blood out of the heart into the body. The sinus
node creates these spontaneous electrical impulses at a rate of
60–100 per minute at rest. This is manifested as a regular pulse
at the same rate when one puts the ﬁnger on the front of the wrist
to feel the pulsation of the artery. The sinus node can increase or
decrease its rate in relation to various needs such as reduction in
the rate during sleep to as low as 40 per minute, and increase to
as high as 150 per minute during physical activities. The sinus
node thus regulates the pumping of the heart in a rhythmic fash-
ion and this is the normal rhythm of the heart. An arrhythmia is
an abnormal rhythm outside of the normal variations mentioned
above. In essence, an arrhythmia is an abnormal rhythm or
beating of the heart. It can be due to abnormal function of the
sinus node or it can arise from other areas which normally do not
initiate electrical impulses. The arrhythmia can be manifested as
rapid and regular heart beats (tachycardia), rapid and irregular
heartbeats (ﬁbrillation), slow heart beats (bradycardia), and
abnormal extra beats occurring before the anticipated normal
beats in a periodic fashion (premature contractions). Arrhyth-
mias originating from the upper chambers (above the ventricles)
of the heart are called supraventricular arrhythmias. Those orig-
inating in the lower chambers (ventricles) are called ventricular
arrhythmias. The symptoms caused by arrhythmias depend on
the type, severity, duration and frequency of arrhythmia. The
severity of symptoms is also related to the underlying function
of the heart. A young person with a normal heart may tolerate
the arrhythmia very well but an older person with some asso-
ciated heart disease will tolerate the same arrhythmia poorly.
The arrhythmia-related symptoms are variable and include
palpitations (feeling of rapid beats), weakness, fatigue, chest
discomfort, shortness of breath, dizzy spells, and in the most
severe form as actual loss of consciousness and cardiac arrest.
The efﬁcacy of diagnosing diseases is therefore highly depen-
dent on the level of training or expertise of the clinician, since
the waveform variations are subtle. By using signal processing
methods, these variations can be observed more clearly.
The QRS complexes and ventricular beats in an electro-
cardiogram represent the depolarization phenomenon of the
ventricles that provides the useful information about their
behavior. Beat detection is the important step in the ECG
processing and analysis. For morphological analysis this is
the reference for detection of other ECG waves and parameter
measurements. Rhythm analysis requires classiﬁcation of QRS
and other ventricular beat complexes as normal and abnormal.
Real-time ventricular beat detection is essential for monitoring
of patients in critical heart condition.
Proper recognition of beats is impeded by power-line inter-
ference, electromyogram noise and baseline drift which are
often present in the ECG signal. In long-term monitoring, elec-
trode impedance can increase considerably resulting in very
low signal-to-noise ratio, which can make detection practically
impossible in a single lead. Therefore, usually two or three leads
are used for monitoring [5].
Several studies to classify various cardiac arrhythmias have
been reported [6–8]. A number of techniques have been used
for identiﬁcation of arrhythmias including correction waveform
analysis [9], time-frequency analysis[10], complexity measures
[11], and a total least squares-based Prony modeling algorithm
[6]. Different features are extracted from the ECG for classiﬁca-
tion of ventricular arrhythmias including QRS and ST segment
based values, heart rate, spectral features, AR coefﬁcients, com-
plexity measures and nonlinear measures [6–8].
In the past, Udupa et al. have proposed a set of algorithms
for interactive visualization, manipulation, and measurement
of large three-dimensional (3-D) objects (e.g. heart) on
general-purpose workstations [12]. They have addressed the
use of these algorithms for visualizing medical data. Morikawa
et al. have investigated the feasibility of four-dimensional
electrocardiography (4-D ECG), a new display in which the
vector loop was rotated and scanned along a timed axis to
overcome the shortcomings of vector cardiography (VCG)[13].
The P wave delineation score, signifying good agreement with
the intraobserver and interobserver variability, was signiﬁcantly
higher in 4-D ECG than those in the orthogonal leads or those
on the transverse and frontal projections. Acharya et al. have
proposed a novel visualization technique to detect the various
cardiac abnormalities easily [14]. They have assigned different
colors for different types of arrhythmias and assigned a grid for
each ECG beat. Later this technique is modiﬁed to sector graph,
to visualize the entire 24 h of data, with an additional facility
to peruse the details of chosen intervals [15]. Such techniques
of ‘software visualization’ have been used in the past, to
display programs, program artifacts and program behavior[16].
Paul et al. have proposed a scalogram plots to scrutinize the
coordinated atrial activity during ventricular ﬁbrillation[17,18].
He et al. have proposed the 3-D image of cardiac bioelectric
source distribution from body-surface electrocardiograms [19].
Cardiac electrical sources were modeled by a current dipole
distribution throughout the entire myocardium, and estimated
by using the Laplacian weighted minimum norm (LWMN)
algorithm from body-surface potentials. The approach we
have taken is to combine the information from different ECG
channels (leads) to construct an electrical dipole known as the
cardiac vector which varies over time. This vector summarizes
the electrical activities of the heart in the time domain.
In our work, we have considered the following types of car-
diac arrhythmias [20–22]. The heart rate (beats per minute) is
given by the expression
HR = 60
tr−r
(bpm) (1)

J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254 247
1.1. Types of cardiac conditions
1.1.1. Normal sinus rhythm (NSR)
All P waves upright, rounded and similar in size and shape.
P wave exists for every QRS complex. Each P wave is the same
distance from the QRS complex – less than 0.20 seconds. All
QRS complexes have the same size and shape and points in the
same direction. Each QRS is at the same distance from the T
waves and the duration of the QRS complex is 0.10 seconds or
less. Heart rate is varying 60–100 bpm and is rhythmic.
1.1.2. Ectopics
Preventricular contraction (PVC), bigeminy and couplets etc.
fall in this type of abnormality. QRS complex is widened and
not associated with preceding P wave. T wave is inverted after
PVC. It is often followed by a compensatory pause. In couplets,
there are two consecutive PVCs. In bigeminy, there is PVC after
every other NSR [23–26].
1.1.3. Atrial ﬁbrillation (AF)
In atrial ﬁbrillation, sinus rhythm does not occur. Instead,
multiple “wavelets” of electrical impulses travel randomly
through the atria, leading to random activation of different parts
of the atria at different times. The walls of the atria quiver due to
the tissues of the right and left atria are not stimulated to contract
in an organized manner. Though this rhythm is irregular (when
examined more closely), it appears to be regular.
1.1.4. Complete heart block (CHB)
The heart rate will be usually between 30–35 bpm. P waves
generated from the sinus node are not conducted to the ven-
tricles because of block at the A V node. The P waves are
indicated but show no relation to the QRS complexes. Since no
impulses are conducted, the ventricular rate becomes dependent
on spontaneous ventricular depolarizations. Severe symptomatic
bradycardia with HR = 20–40 bpm are observed as the ventricles
are depolarized by a ventricular escape rhythm.
1.1.5. Right bundle branch block
Bundle branch block (BBB) is a disruption in the normal
ﬂow of electrical pulses that drives the heartbeat. Patients with
BBB are generally without symptoms unless the disease is severe
enough to cause a complete infranodal A–V block and very slow
heart rate. In RBBB, the right bundle branch no longer conducts
electricity. Therefore, as the electrical impulse leaves the HIS
bundle, it enters left bundle branch only, and is carried to the left
ventricle. Then, from the left ventricle, the electrical impulse
ﬁnally makes its way to the right ventricle. As a result, the two
ventricles no longer receive the electrical impulse simultane-
ously. First, the left ventricle receives the electrical impulse,
then the right. The ECGs of RBBB have increased duration of
the QRS complex (> 0.12 s) because it takes the right ventricle
so much longer to depolarize [20–22].
1.1.6. Left bundle branch block
In LBBB, the opposite occurs. Here, the left bundle branch
no longer conducts electricity. The electrical impulse thus enters
right bundle branch, and is carried to the right ventricle. From
there, it ﬁnally spreads to the left ventricle. Once again, the two
ventricles no longer receive the electrical impulse simultane-
ously. First, the right ventricle receives the electrical impulse,
then the left. Technically for left bundle branch block to be
present, the QRS duration is 120 ms or greater, there is poor
R wave progression in V 1 thru V4 and the T wave vector is in
the opposite direction to the QRS vector (T waves are inverted
in I, V5 and V6).
1.1.7. Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)
LVH is the abnormal thickening of the myocardium (mus-
cle) of the left ventricle of the heart. While LVH itself is not
a disease, it is usually a marker for disease involving the heart.
Disease processes that can cause LVH include any condition that
increases the after load that the heart has to contract against, and
some primary diseases of the muscle of the heart.
Causes of increased after load that can cause LVH include
aortic stenosis, aortic insufﬁciency, and hypertension. Primary
disease of the muscle of the heart that cause LVH are known
as hypertrophic. Left ventricular hypertrophy produces abnor-
mally large leftward electrical forces that travel toward the left
precordial leads V5–V6 and away from V1. P wave is wide and
notched in leads I, II and V4 and V6 and biphasic P wave in leads
V1 and V2. QRS axis is usually normal but maybe deviated to
the left which is greater than −30
◦. Deep S waves are present
in lead III and are 20 mm or 2.0 mV or more in lead III. T wave
inversion is present in lead I and “downsloping” ST segment
depression.
2. Materials and method
The 2D cardiac vector in the frontal plane may be recon-
structed from the signals obtained from any two limb-lead ECGs,
that is any two from leads I, II and III.
For this investigation, the digitized limb-lead ECGs are
obtained from Physiobank’s Physikalisch-Technische Bunde-
sanstalt database. This database contains the full 12-lead
digitized ECG data of healthy and nonhealthy patients, includ-
ing those suffering from cardiac illnesses such as bundle branch
block, myocardial infarction and cardiomyopathy. There is
a header ﬁle, which describes clinical summary within each
patient folder.
2.1. Preprocessing
Preprocessing involves the following:
• re-sample digitized signals to a sampling rate of 512 Hz. Orig-
inal signal had a sampling rate of 1000 Hz;
• pass the data through a low pass ﬁlter with a cut-off frequency
of 15 Hz to remove unwanted high frequencies present in ECG
signal;
• apply a high pass ﬁlter with cut-off frequency 0.3 Hz to sup-
press baseline wander present in ECG signal;
• as the low pass ﬁlter is of second order and has a lower dB,
a band-reject ﬁlter of cut-off frequencies 50 and 60 Hz to

248 J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254
suppress the power-line interference noise, as the low pass
ﬁlter is of second order and has a lower dB;
• similarly, the high pass ﬁlter is also of second order and has
lower dB, a median ﬁlter was used to extract baseline wander
of the processed ECG signal, and then subtract it from the pro-
cessed ECG signal to effectively remove all baseline wander.
2.2. Cardiac vector representation in 2-D
In this work, we attempt to investigate the construction and
display of the cardiac vector over time. The display is limited
to a 2-D representation of a cardiac vector although the cardiac
vector is actually a 3-D quantity. The 2-D representation of a
cardiac vector is more manageable as we acquire foundational
knowledge to cope with the intricacies of displaying the 3-D
vector.
By studying the shape of the path traversed by the cardiac
vector, the observer can deduce, how the heart depolarizes and
repolarizes. Cardiac disorders distort this path into different
shapes and different orientations.
There are three distinct features of the ECG that the clinician
uses:
• the P wave – which corresponds to the depolarization of the
atrial muscles as the atria contracts and pumps blood into the
ventricles;
• the QRS complex – which corresponds to the depolarization
of the ventricular muscles as the ventricles pump blood out
of the heart;
• the T wave – which corresponds to the repolarization of the
ventricular muscles as the ventricles relax and gets ready for
the next contraction.
In general, as the heart beats, the cardiac vector forms three
distinctive loops that correspond to the three features. Their
shapes, that is the size and orientation of the loops, and their loca-
tions in the display quadrants of the loop are all useful indicators
that can be used to determine any cardiac disorder.
Take, for example, the cardiac disorders known as BBB;
whether it is the RBBB or the LBBB is not readily discerned by
looking at the ECG waveforms. But they can be determined more
easily by studying how the QRS complex loop traverses the dis-
play quadrants. TakingFig. 1 as an example, we can see that the
QRS complex rotates through the display quadrants (observable
when display is dynamic).
If the rotation crosses from the fourth quadrant to the ﬁrst, it
means the right ventricles depolarize ﬁrst before the left ventri-
cles. This is indicative of the LBBB. On the other hand, if the
rotation crosses from the ﬁrst quadrant to the fourth, it means the
left ventricles depolarize ﬁrst before the right ventricles. This is
indicative of the (RBBB).
The way the heart depolarizes is reﬂected in the type of car-
diac abnormality. This cardiac vector graphs may yield more
information and provide an increase in accuracy in the detection
of heart disease as compared to conventional methods.
The user-friendly interface allows the observer to easily
choose which beat (ECG complex) out of the ECG recording
Fig. 1. Patient with left bundle branch block.

J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254 249
to plot out the cardiac vector. Distinctive variations in the shape
of the cardiac vector appear for different cardiac disorders.
2.3. Lead selection for reconstructing of the cardiac vector
Two similar methods are used to reconstruct the cardiac vec-
tor. The methods essentially differ in the choice of using different
limb leads. The ﬁrst method utilizes the leads I and II, while the
second utilizes leads II and III. The cardiac vector derived from
either method yields similar plots with minor variations in mag-
nitude, which is expected because of the different signals used.
The method to select is dependent on which leads have better
signals.
2.4. Mathematical derivation of the cardiac vector
The mathematical analysis for the reconstruction of the car-
diac vector is obtained from the Eindhoven triangle formed by
the limb lead ECGs, as shown in Fig. 2. The instantaneous car-
diac vector M
R is represented by the arrow in the middle of the
triangle. The projections of the cardiac vector upon the leads
I, II and III are represented by M
1, M2 and M3 respectively
(Fig. 3).
2.4.1. Case 1: Cardiac vector from Lead I and Lead II
The instantaneous angular displacementθof the cardiac vec-
tor from lead I is given by:
θ[n] = tan−1
(((M2[n]/M1[n]) − 1/2)
0.866
)
(2)
where n is the sample number,
Fig. 2. Eindhoven’s triangle.
Table 1
Algorithms for cardiac vector formula, constraints of the formula
Condition (n refers to the sample number) Result of θ[n](degrees)
If M1[n] = 0 and M2[n]>0 9 0
If M1[n] = 0 and M2[n]<0 2 7 0
If M1[n]<0 θ[n] + 180
If M1[n] > 0 and M2[n]<0 θ[n] + 360
If M1[n] > 0 and M2[n]>0 θ[n]
The instantaneous magnitude of the cardiac vector is thus:
MR[n] = (M2[n] − (M1[n]/2))
(0.866 ∗sin θ[n]) (3)
Table 1is needed to keep the equations(2) and (3) operational
since computers are unable to cope with inﬁnity values, which
would occur for tangents of 90
◦ and 270◦.
Fig. 3. Plot of channel 1 and 2 cardiac vector with magnitude and orientation.

250 J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254
The actual computation of the cardiac vector has the follow-
ing steps.
2.4.1.1. Step 1: Calculation of magnitude and orientation.
Each sample is used to calculate the orientation θ[n] and the
magnitude MR[n] from equations (2) and (3).
2.4.1.1.1. Step 2: Conditions of matching. Each sample of
leads I and II is checked for the conditions inTable 1. For exam-
ple, if M1[n]= −10 (i.e. <0) and M2[n] = 10 (i.e. > 0), the actual
orientation θ[n] is thus derived by adding 180◦ to the calculated
orientation in equation (2).
2.4.1.1.1.1. Step 3: Plotting of the cardiac vector.2.4.1.1.1.1.
Step 3: Plotting of the cardiac vector The result of θ[n] and
MR[n] are plotted in polar format to yield a graphical cardiac
vector plot over a short period of time (typical cardiac period is
1 s).
2.4.2. Case 2: Cardiac vector from leads II and III
The formulae for deriving the cardiac vector from leads II
and III is similar to that of deriving from leads I and II, if we
note that the orientation of leads II and III has an angular offset
of 60
◦ to that of leads I and II.
Thus we can write:
α[n] = tan−1
(((M3[n]/M2[n]) − 1/2)
0.866
)
(4)
MR[n] = (M3[n] − (M2[n]/2))
(0.866 ∗sin(α[n])) (5)
where the variable α is the angular orientation with respect to
lead II.
The angular orientation θwith respect to lead I is therefore:
θ= α+ 60◦
Table 2 is used to determine the actual orientation θfor the
cardiac vector.α has to be processed toα1 before it can be used
to calculate the actual orientation θ.
2.5. Plotting of the cardiac vector
2.5.1.1. Step 1: Initialization of data
The user ﬁrst enters the ECG beat number (HB) to be ana-
lyzed in the GUI provided. For example, the physician want to
Table 2
Algorithms for cardiac vector formula, constraints of the formula
Condition (n refers to
the sample number)
Result of α1
(degrees)
Result of θ(degrees)
If M2[n] = 0 and
M3[n]>0
90 150
If M2[n] = 0 and
M3[n]<0
270 330
If M2[n]<0 α[n] + 180 α1[n]+6 0
If M2[n] > 0 and
M3[n]<0
α[n] + 360 α1[n] + 60 (ifα1[n] < 300)
α1[n] − 300 (if α1[n] > 300)
If M2[n] > 0 and
M3[n]>0
/H9251[n] α1[n]+6 0
Table 3
Algorithms for phase extraction
Condition Algorithm
Start of a phase If θis increasing and mR is increasing,
then it is start of phase.
End of a phase If θis decreasing and mR is decreasing,
then it is end of phase.
visualize the cardiac vector of 22nd ECG beat, then he needs to
enter 22 in the Heartbeat select bar.
This initialization will generate a digitized data of the PQRST
waveform corresponding to the HB number and becomes the
basis for computing the cardiac vector.
2.5.1.1.1. Step 2: QRS detection. In this step, an ECG signal
with 550–600 samples corresponding to the heartbeat number
(HB) selected will be displayed. The QRS detection algorithm
will run automatically to detect the R peaks [23–26].
2.5.1.1.1.1. Step 3: Processing of the ECG signal. The
ECG data samples within the identiﬁed window are used to
compute the instantaneous orientation [θ] and magnitude of the
cardiac vector [M
R].
2.5.1.1.1.1.1. Step 4: Cardiac vector display.2.5.1.1.1.1.1.
Step 4: Cardiac vector display The orientation [ θ] and magni-
tude of the cardiac vector [MR] are plotted using these two polar
co-ordinates.
Different segments of the PQRST waveform are plotted using
different colors to indicate the progression of the cardiac vector.
The plot starts with red, changing colors to green and ﬁnally to
blue as it ends.
2.6. Features extraction
The phase information of each features like P wave, T wave
and QRS complex are detected ﬁrst. The interval between two
successive QRS complexes is deﬁned as the r–r interval (t
r–r s),
is determined by the QRS algorithm[23–26]. After the detection
of QRS complex, the window is shifted behind by 100 samples
to search for the interval of P wave. Then another window is
shifted ahead (from QRS complex) by 170 samples to search
for T wave interval. The onset and the offset of the peaks are
required to detect the P wave and T wave intervals. The onset of
T wave, deﬁned as the T point, is found by ﬁrst locating the T
wave peak which is the maximal absolute value, relative to the
isoelectric line, between J + 80 ms and R + 400 ms. The onset of
T wave, the T point, is then found by looking for a 35-ms period
on the R side of the T wave, which has values within one sample
unit of each other (Table 3).
3. Results
In these plots, there is QRS width, P interval and T interval
is plotted. The plot shows the resultant of lead I and lead II
waveforms. And the resultant is shifted by an angle ofθbetween
two samples.

J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254 251
Fig. 4. Vector cardiogram of normal sinus rhythm.
The Fig. 4shows the cardiac vector of a normal sinus rhythm.
The biggest loop (in grey arrow) represents the QRS complex
and the second largest loop (in black arrow) represents the T
wave. In this ﬁgure, P wave loop, which is the smallest loop
(white arrow), has been partially overlapped and circumferenced
by the T wave loop and so the cardiac vector plot may appears
to have only two loops at a casual glance. In general, there will
always be three cardiac loops for a normal sinus rhythm. The P
wave loop is smaller in magnitude and has the same orientation
as the larger T wave loop. It is more readily viewed by selectively
choosing the portion of the ECG to plot just the P wave.
The Fig. 5shows the cardiac vector of a complete heart block.
There are distinctive differences from a normal sinus rhythm.
The QRS loop and the T wave loop are not centralized, an effect
of the deep S wave in the QRS complex. The QRS loop also has
its own unique shape.
Vector cardiogram corresponding to the left bundle branch
Block beat is shown in Fig. 6. The curve corresponding to the
Fig. 5. Vector cardiogram of complete heart block.

252 J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254
Fig. 6. Vector cardiogram of left bundle branch block.
Fig. 7. Vector cardiogram of right bundle branch block.
QRS complex duration is oriented towards ﬁrst quadrant, P wave
and T wave duration is clearly seen.
The Fig. 7 shows the vector cardiogram plot of the right bun-
dle branch block. The curve corresponding to the QRS width
duration is shifted to the 3rd quadrant.
In the vector cardiogram corresponding to atrial ﬁbrillation
(Fig. 8), the curve corresponding to the QRS complex is oriented
towards 3rd quadrant and the curve corresponding to the P wave
is absent.
4. Discussion
In this paper, we have proposed the visualization of car-
diac disorders using cardiac vector plot. In our work, we have
achieved early stages of recognizing these disorders by looking
at the loop patterns for each heartbeat. For example, the orien-
tation and the magnitude of the loop indicate the polarization
of the heart and it helps in the detection of left or right bundle
branch block.

J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254 253
Fig. 8. Vector cardiogram of atrial ﬁbrillation.
ECG signals are essentially nonstationary signals; they dis-
play a fractal like self-similarity. Disease symptoms are highly
subjective and it occurs at random in the time scale. Therefore,
the physician may have to observe the patient for long inter-
vals to diagnose the afﬂiction. The ECG may contain important
information about the nature of disease, both in its shape and
duration between its salient peaks and troughs. The actual val-
ues and variation of these parameters are not obvious for a casual
survey of the waveform upon the screen. However, to (study and)
pinpoint anomalies in voluminous data collected over several
hours is strenuous and time consuming. However, the problem
can be effectively handled by using computer for analysis and
display of salient features of the signal. In this study, features
are extracted from the ECG and plotted as new plot using these
features.
In Fig. 4 (normal subject), the QRS loop is a nice oval shape
occupying the 3rd and 4th quadrants, showing the polarization
of the heart during the QRS interval. In addition, it is in the
same orientation with the T loop. This indicates that, the QRS
complex and T wave are not inverted from each other. Fig. 5
(complete heart block), has an abnormal QRS loop indicating
the improper polarization of the heart. The QRS loop and the T
loop are also not aligned in the same orientation signifying that,
one of them is inverted. In this case, the QRS loop occupies the
1st and 2nd quadrants and so the QRS loop is inverted. Lead
I, of both Figs. 4 and 5 , looks similar. It is very difﬁcult to
detect any cardiac disorder just by inspecting the ECG at lead
I. Similarly, other abnormalities are indicated clearly in their
shapes and orientations.
More information about the ECG signal can be obtained by
converting its features in to the cardiac vector plots. Using huge
database and with more features these results can be further
improved.
5. Conclusion
A visual display platform for the study of subtle changes
in the ECG data is developed. This display technique is useful
for identiﬁcation of abnormalities, which would considerably
reduce the tedium involved in the manual scrutiny of data. In this
technique, the features extracted for each type of abnormality,
has unique plot. The orientation and shape of these of curves
will vary from disease to the other. This technique does not need
extensive computations and is simple to operate. The platform
is expected to be of signiﬁcant help to study the effects of drugs,
treatment and therapy.
6. Hardware and software speciﬁcation
The program to eliminate the baseline wander and extract
the different features: P interval, QRS width and ST interval are
written in MATLAB.
References
[1] Lown B, Verrier RL. Neural activity and ventricular ﬁbrillation. N Engl J
Med 1976;294:165–170.
[2] Corr PB, Yamada KA, Witkowski FX. Mechanisms controlling cardiac
autonomic function and their relation to arrhythmogenesis. In: Fozzard
HA, Haber E, Jennings RB, Katz AN, Morgan HE, editors. The heart and
cardiovascular system. New York, NY: Raven Press; 1986. p. 1343–403.
[3] Schwartz PJ, Priori SG. Sympathetic nervous system and cardiac arrhyth-
mias. In: Zipes DP, Jalife J, editors. Cardiac electrophysiology: from cell
to bedside. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1990. p. 330–43.
[4] Levy MN, Schwartz PJ, editors. Vagal control of the heart: experimental
basis and clinical implications. Armonk, NY: Futura; 1994.
[5] Moreas JCTB, Seixas MO, Vilani FN, Costa EV . A QRS complex detection
algorithm using electrocardiogram leads. Comput Cardiol 2002;29:205–8.

254 J. Chee et al. / IRBM 29 (2008) 245–254
[6] Chen SW. Two-stage discrimination of cardiac arrhythmias using a total
least squares-based prony modeling algorithm. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng
2000;47:1317–26.
[7] Melo SL, Caloba LP, Nadal J. Arrhythmia analysis using artiﬁcial neu-
ral network and decimated electrocardiographic data. Comput Cardiol
2000;27:73–6.
[8] Small M, Yu DJ, Grubb N, Simonotto J, Fox KAA, Harrison RG. Auto-
matic identiﬁcation and recording of cardiac arrhythmia. Comput Cardiol
2000;27:355–8.
[9] Caswell SA, Kluge KS, Chiang CMJ. Pattern recognition of cardiac
arrhythmias using two intracardiac channels. In: Proceedings of Computers
in Cardiology. 1993. p. 181–4.
[10] Afonoso VX, Tompkins WJ. Detecting ventricular ﬁbrillation: Selecting
the appropriate time-frequency analysis tool for the application. IEEE Eng
Med Biol Mag 1995;14:152–9.
[11] Xu SZ, Yi SZ, Thakor NV , Wang ZZ. Detecting ventricular tachycar-
dia and ﬁbrillation by complexity measure. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng
1999;46:548–55.
[12] Udupa JK, Odhner D. Fast visualization, manipulation, and analysis
of binary volumetric objects. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph Appl
1991;11(6):53–62.
[13] Morikawa J, Habuchi Y , Nishio M, Yamamoto T, Tanaka H, Kashima K.
Delineation of premature P waves on four-dimensional electrocardiogra-
phy, a new display of electrical forces by computer techniques. Angiology
1996;47(11):1101–6.
[14] Acharya UR, Bhat PS, Niranjan UC. A display platform for electrocardio-
grams. Innov Technol Biol Med (ITBM-RBM) 1999;20:303–6.
[15] Acharya UR, Bhat PS, Niranjan UC. Comprehensive visualization of car-
diac health. Comput Biol Med J 2002;32(1):49–54.
[16] Ball T, Eick SG. Software visualization in the large. IEEE Comput
1996:33–43.
[17] Addison PS, Watson JN, Clegg GR, Steen PA, Robertson CE. Finding
coordinated atrial ﬁbrillation during ventricular ﬁbrillation using wavelet
decomposition. IEEE-EMBS Magazine 2002;21(1):58–65.
[18] Acharya UR, Bhat PS, Kannathal N, Rao A, Min LC. Analysis of cardiac
health using fractal dimension and continuous wavelet transform. Innov
Technol Biol Med (ITBM-RBM) 2005;26(2):133–9.
[19] He B, Wu D. Imaging and visualization of 3-D cardiac electric activity.
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed 2001;5(3):181–6.
[20] Sokolow, M., Mcllroy, M.B., Chiethin, M.D., 1990, Clinical cardiology,
VLANGE medical book.
[21] Goldschlager N, Goldman MJ. Principles of clinical electrocardiography.
Thirteenth Edition; 1989. pp. 58–238.
[22] Huszar, R.J., 2002, Basic dysrhythmias, Third edition Interpretation &
Management, 110-379.
[23] Tompkins WJ. Biomedical signal processing. Prentice Hall Publications;
1993.
[24] Pan J, Tompkins WJ. A Real time QRS detection algorithm. IEEE Trans
Biomed Eng 1985;32(3):230–6.
[25] Lynn PA. Online digital ﬁlter for biological signals: some fast designs for
a small computer. Med Biol Eng Comput 1977:534–40.
[26] Wariar R, Eswaran C. Integer coefﬁcient bandpass ﬁlter for the simultane-
ous removal of baseline wander, 50 and 100 Hz interference from the ECG.
Med Biol Eng Comput 1991:333–6.